Adam's Challah (All credit to our friend Adam, the world's best
philosophizing-software -engineering-Puerto-Rican
-Jewish-atheist baker)

1 packet or 1 tbsp active dry yeast
1 tbsp sugar
1 cup warm water
1 cup bread flour

2 large eggs at room temperature
½ cup vegetable oil
¼ cup honey (or sugar)
1 tsp salt
about 3 additional cups bread flour (you can optionally substitute up to 2 cups whole wheat flour)

egg wash

sesame seeds, poppy seeds, or raisins (optional)


First, make the sponge. While you're doing this, take the eggs out of
the fridge so they can come up to room temperature while the sponge is
rising.

The sponge:

In the bowl of a stand mixer (or in any large mixing bowl, if you will
be kneading by hand) dissolve the yeast and 1 tablespoon sugar in the
warm water. Let stand for 5 minutes. Add the 1 cup of flour and whisk
together to add a little air. Cover with plastic wrap and put aside
for 1 to 2 hours (it will at least double in volume).

The dough:

Add the eggs, oil, honey, and salt to the sponge and mix lightly with
a fork. Add the additional 3 cups of flour and mix again with a fork
so the flour is all moistened. If you use a mixer, this will prevent
the dreaded "mushroom cloud of flour" when you turn it on. Attach the
bowl to your mixer and, using a dough hook attachment, knead the dough
first at low, then medium speed for 3-4 minutes. If you're kneading by
hand, knead for 8-10 minutes. The dough should be slightly sticky, but
not too wet (it will typically not be dry enough to pull completely
from the sides of the bowl, as some other doughs do). Add more flour,
a tablespoon at a time, if it doesn't seem right.

Cover the bowl again with plastic wrap (if you've hand kneaded, put
the dough back in a clean bowl). Let the dough rise for another hour
(or two, it's not too critical). It should about double in volume
again in an hour, more if you let it rise for longer.

Preheat the oven to 350 degrees.

Turn out the dough onto a floured cutting board. You may have to
scrape the sides of the bowl to get all the dough out—I told you, it's
a bit sticky! Form the dough into a loose ball and divide in two. I
cut each half into three pieces, roll them with my hands into long
snakes (8-12 inches long) and braid them together. If you're putting in
raisins, roll them in at this step.

Place the braided challahs about 3 inches apart on parchment paper on
a large baking sheet. Cover lightly with plastic wrap or a clean dish towel and let sit for
20-30 minutes.

Remove the plastic wrap and brush the loaves with the egg wash.
Sprinkle sesame seeds and/or poppy seeds, if desired.

Bake for 25-30 minutes, or until the loaves are a nice color and sound
a bit hollow when tapped on the bottom. Cool on a rack for at least 20
minutes before eating. If you let them cool completely, they can be
put in plastic bags and used the next day, or frozen and reheated
later.

Sounds complicated, but it's actually quite an easy recipe once you've
made it a couple of times and is very forgiving.

ALTERNATIVE:

Instead of braided loaves, I sometimes use this recipe to make 24 dinner rolls or 16 hamburger buns. In these cases, the baking time is somewhat less (20-25 minutes).